In the Project Control module, we discussed procurement management.
It is likely that your project will need products or
services provided by third party companies,
and therefore your project will need some amount of procurement management.
Now as I mentioned before,
your company may have a procurement or vendor management department that
have certain roles and responsibilities that are not yours,
but they will likely not have the detailed knowledge about what services or
products you will need to procure to support your project.
So outsourcing and vendor management is becoming a larger and
larger portion of the contributions to IT projects,
so be prepared to engage and manage your service providers.
Project managers require management skills who can work with vendors,
and that is not easy for some people.
Each vendor may be a unique and special relationship and at many times
you will be the one deciding or influencing the KPIs,
Key Performance Indicators, or the SLAs,
Service Level Agreements, for each vendor.
So ensure the vendor meets these performance metrics and hence you will
expect from each vendor things like status reports,
performance reviews, and all the things your stakeholders want from you.
So in a way, you are now the customer or stakeholder of the vendor.
Procuring goods and services from external suppliers can
be a critical path for your projects.
So often the performance of the supplier will reflect on the
performance of you and of the overall project team.
It's therefore crucial that you manage your supplier's
performance carefully to ensure that they produce
deliverables which meet your expectations.
So if you are going to do some procurement management,
you may be doing some contract negotiation as well.
So what are those drivers for the need to improve your negotiation skills?
Well no man is an island.
You're going to be outsourcing labor, outsourcing services,
and with cloud-based services,
you're going to be outsourcing much more than you ever imagined.
So some of the negotiation skills that you will need will be
certainly understanding of basic contracts,
maybe knowledge on how to write statements of work.
What is it that needs to be done by that vendor?
And also, you're going to have the skill to write KPIs and SLAs.
Lastly, if you think it's important, man just you better put it in that contract.
That way you can ensure that your vendor will provide what you need in a
timely manner to meet your project's requirements.
In this entire section, whether working with external vendors,
stakeholders, customers, your management,
and your team members,
getting to a win-win position is critical for your success.
So what do I mean by win-win?
Seek mutual benefit with others.
It's a team.
You want to make sure that all parties feel good about
the decisions that have been made.
And lastly, it's not your way or my way,
it's a better way, so keep these three elements,
these three steps in mind when you're in a room talking,
sharing, negotiating.
Seek mutual benefit.
What is good for them and you?
And do we all feel good about these decisions,
and if not, ask why not and come to a better decision.
Make sure everyone understands it's not their way or your way, it is a better way for your customers.